The President:
Hi, everybody.
This Tuesday is an important
day for families, businesses,
and our economy.
It's the day a big part of the
Affordable Care Act kicks in,
and tens of millions
of Americans
will finally have
the same chance to buy
quality, affordable health care
as everyone else.
It's also the day that a group
of far-right
Republicans in Congress
might choose to
shut down the government
and potentially
damage the economy
just because they
don't like this law.
I'll get to that in a second.
But first - here's what
the Affordable Care Act
means for you.
If you're one of the vast
majority of Americans
who already have health care,
you already have new benefits
you didn't before,
like free mammograms
and contraceptive
care with no copay,
and discounts on prescription
medicine for seniors.
You've already got new
protections in place too,
like no more lifetime
limits on your care,
no more discriminating
against children
with preexisting
conditions like asthma,
or being able to stay
on your parents' plan
until you turn 26.
That's all
in place and available
to Americans with
health insurance right now.
If you don't have
health insurance,
or if you buy it on
the individual market,
then starting this
Tuesday, October 1st,
you can visit HealthCare.gov
to find what's called
the health insurance marketplace
in your state.
This is a website where you can
compare insurance
plans, side-by-side,
the same way you'd shop
for a TV or a plane ticket.
You'll see new choices
and new competition.
Many of you will
see cheaper prices,
and many of you will
be eligible for tax credits
that bring down
your costs even more.
Nearly 6 in 10 uninsured
Americans will be able
to get coverage
for $100 or less.
If you're one
of the up to half of Americans
with a preexisting condition,
these new plans mean
your insurer can no longer
charge you more
than anyone else.
They can't charge women more
than men for the same coverage.
And they take
effect January 1st.
So get covered
at HealthCare.gov.
And spread the word.
These marketplaces will be
open for business on Tuesday,
no matter what.
The Affordable Care Act is one
of the most important things
we've done as
a country in decades
to strengthen economic security
for the middle class
and all who strive
to join the middle class.
And it is going to work.
That's also one of the reasons
it's so disturbing
that Republicans
in Congress are threatening
to shut down the government -
or worse -
if I don't agree
to gut this law.
Congress has two
responsibilities right now:
pass a budget on time,
and pay our bills on time.
If Congress doesn't
pass a budget by Monday -
the end of the fiscal year -
the government shuts down,
along with many vital services
the American people depend on.
On Friday,
the Senate passed a bill
to keep the government open.
But Republicans in the House
have been more concerned with
appeasing an extreme faction of
their party than working to pass
a budget that creates new jobs
or strengthens the middle class.
And in the next couple days,
these Republicans
will have to decide
whether to join the Senate
and keep the government open,
or create a crisis
that will hurt people
for the sole
purpose of advancing
their ideological agenda.
Past government shutdowns
have disrupted the economy.
This shutdown would, too.
At a moment when our economy
has steadily gained traction,
and our deficits
have been falling faster
than at any time in 60 years,
a shutdown would be
a purely self-inflicted wound.
And that's why many
Republican Senators
and Republican governors
have urged Republicans
in the House of Representatives
to knock it off,
pass a budget, and move on.
This brings me to the second
responsibility Congress has.
Once they vote to keep
the government open,
they must also vote
within the next couple weeks
to allow the Treasury
to pay the bills
for the money that
Congress has already spent.
Failure to meet
this responsibility
would be far more dangerous
than a government shutdown -
it would be
an economic shutdown,
with impacts not just here,
but around the world.
Unfortunately some
Republicans have suggested that
unless I agree to an even
longer list of demands -
not just gutting the
health care law,
but things like cutting
taxes for millionaires
or rolling back rules on
big banks and polluters -
they'll push the button,
throwing America into default
for the first time in history
and risk throwing us
back into recession.
I will work with anyone
who wants to have
a serious conservation
about our economic future.
But I will not negotiate over
Congress' responsibility
to pay the bills it
has already racked up.
I don't know how to be
more clear about this:
no one gets to threaten
the full faith and credit
of the United States of America
just to extract
ideological concessions.
No one gets to hurt our economy
and millions of innocent people
just because there are a
couple laws you don't like.
It hasn't been done in the past,
and we're not going to
start doing it now.
The American people have worked
too hard to recover from crisis
to see extremists in their
Congress cause another one.
And every day this goes on
is another day that we can't
continue the work of rebuilding
the great American middle class.
Congress needs to pass a budget
in time, pay its bills on time,
and refocus on the
everyday concerns
of the people who
sent them there.
That's what I'm focused on.
That's what I'll
keep fighting for.
Thanks so much.